Let's talk about named templates.
Let's look at this deployment file. So here we have a bunch of labels defined. And they're all
the same lines that are repeated multiple times throughout this file. And these may also be
present in other objects. For example, this service file, these are very repetitive. And for now,
these are only a few and it might be easy to write. However, when there are many lines such
as these, repeating things can get complicated. And we might mix things up and get them wrong.
So how do we ensure that it's the same lines used everywhere? How can we be consistent and reuse
code and remove duplication, we can remove the repeating lines to what is called a partial or
named template. Let's start with the service file for now. We move the repeating lines to a file
called _helpers.tpl. Now the underscore in the file name tells Helm not to
consider this file as a usual template file. Because when we run the helm create command,
Helm reads all the files in the templates directory and converts them to Kubernetes manifests. In this
case, this is only a helper file. And we don't want this file to end up as a Kubernetes manifest
file, because it's going to be invalid. So all files starting with an underscore are skipped
from being created or converted into a Kubernetes manifest file. You can then give these lines
or this template a name using the define statement like this. Now here, we name these lines
labels because these are labels. Now these lines can now be imported, or rather included
anywhere we want using a simple template statement like this. To the template statement,
you tell what helper template you'd like to use, we named it labels. This is called a named
template. Now that works as expected and generates a file like this. Now if you look at the labels,
we have defined in the helpers file, they have the release name hard coded. Now we know that
that's going to create an issue when we install multiple releases. What if we had a template
directive within the helper file like this. So instead of hard coding the name, we add a template
directive .Release.Name, and we expect it to be replaced by the actual release name.
And doing that, in fact, gives a result like this, where it takes out the expected
release name. Now why is that? Remember, we talked about scope earlier, the scope is with
in the template file and does not get transferred to the helper file. So the helper
file has no data to work with. To transfer the current scope to the template file,
add a dot to the end of the template statement, like this.
dot, as we learned refers to the current scope, and it is then accessible from within the helper
file. Now, when you move lines of code to templates, remember that you must have the same
indentation or the number of spaces before these lines as you'd expect it to have in the actual
output file. This is because when the template statement adds the lines defined in the template,
it simply adds them there as is. So let us now see how this plays out with the deployment file.
Now in the deployment.yaml file, there are multiple places where the template has to be used.
So we replace all of them with the template statement that we used before. However,
when the file is generated, it is not formatted as expected. The template statement added the
lines from the helper file. However, it added the same indentation for all the instances,
and is resulting in a file that's not formatted correctly. It works as expected with the first
instance, because we had added the correct indentation for the first one. However, the later
ones, or the second and the third instances aren't indented correctly. Now there is a function that
helps fix the indentation. Guess what it's called indent. So to fix the first error, we must indent
the lines by an additional two spaces. And to fix the second error, we must indent the lines by
an additional four spaces. So here we are piping the output of the template statement to the indent
function. However, there's a small problem. This won't work because template is not a function,
it is an action. And like functions, you can't pipe its output to another function.
So what's shown here doesn't really work. So another function that does the same job as
the template is the include function, it can import named templates, and also pipe it to another
function. So replacing the template function with the include statements now helps in adding
the right indentation to these lines. Well, that's all about templates and functions,
and I'll see you in the next one.